Indian Lok Sabha elections of 2024
Also known as: Indian general election of 2024
Written by 
Fact-checked by 
Last Updated: Nov 30, 2024 • Article History
Quick Facts
Also called: Indian general election, 2024
Date: 2024
Location: India
News • Seven CFCs and 21 ID projects approved in Andhra Pradesh under MSE-CDP during 2019-24 • Nov. 28, 2024, 7:16 AM ET (The Hindu) 
More than 968 million voters had registered ahead of India’s 2024 general election, for which voting was held in seven phases between April 19 and June 1. A record 642 million people voted in this election, held to determine the majority party in the Lok Sabha (“House of the People”), India’s lower house of parliament, and to constitute the 18th Lok Sabha. At the end of the tabulation on June 4 and June 5, the ruling Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP), with 240 seats, fell short of the majority mark of 272 seats needed to win a clear majority even though the National Democratic Alliance (NDA), the BJP-led alliance, won enough votes to form the government at the center. The 293 seats won by the NDA is shy of the 400 seats targeted by Prime Minister Narendra Modi by a wide margin, but it paves the way for Modi to come to power as the prime minister of India for a third consecutive term. The BJP will depend on support from its allies as the Indian National Congress and its INDIA alliance made some unexpected gains in these elections.

According to the Election Commission of India (ECI), India has the largest electorate in the world. The number of voters and election officers involved in this election is mind-boggling. The ECI used about 15 million government employees and security personnel—who were turned into election officials temporarily—to conduct the 2024 election. No voter should have to travel more than 1.24 miles (2 km) to vote. This mandate, along with the difficult terrain in some places, poses a challenge for election officials. Polling officers trekked for 24 miles (39 km) in difficult terrain to reach a single voter in Malogam, a remote village in Arunachal Pradesh near the China border, in the first phase of the 2024 elections. In a first, the ECI also facilitated home voting for voters over 85 years and for persons with disabilities in the 2024 elections.

Elections also happened in 2024 for some seats in the Rajya Sabha (“Council of States”), the upper house of parliament, as part of the two-year cycle in which roughly one-third of Rajya Sabha members are replaced by newly elected members. The Lok Sabha is considered the more powerful of the two houses of parliament because it has more seats, exerts financial control, and is the house to which India’s Council of Ministers is responsible. Money bills (bills related to government expenditure, taxation, and other financial issues of the Indian government) can be introduced only in the Lok Sabha, and Lok Sabha members can pass a motion of no confidence to challenge the government’s majority. If a no-confidence motion is passed in the Lok Sabha, the government must resign.

More than 968 million voters were registered by February 2, 2024. Who are they?
About 497 million are men.
More than 471 million are women.
More than 48,000 are “third gender.”
More than 18 million are age 18–19.
More than 8.8 million are people living with disabilities.
Source: Election Commission of India.

How are Lok Sabha representatives elected?
The Lok Sabha can have as many as 550 elected members, or representatives, who are elected directly by the people through universal adult suffrage. Of these 550 members, 530 represent the various Indian states, and 20 represent the union territories (UTs). Currently, the Lok Sabha has 543 seats for which elections are conducted by the ECI. One member is elected from each of the 543 constituencies into which the country is divided. The table below lists the number of constituencies in each Indian state and union territory. Some of these seats are reserved for members of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes.

Number of constituencies in Indian states and union territories
state or union territory	total constituencies
Source: Election Commission of India.
Uttar Pradesh	80
Maharashtra	48
West Bengal	42
Bihar	40
Tamil Nadu	39
Madhya Pradesh	29
Karnataka	28
Gujarat	26
Rajasthan	25
Andhra Pradesh	25
Odisha	21
Kerala	20
Telangana	17
Assam	14
Jharkhand	14
Punjab	13
Chhattisgarh	11
Haryana	10
Delhi (UT)	7
Jammu & Kashmir (UT)	5
Uttarakhand	5
Himachal Pradesh	4
Arunachal Pradesh	2
Goa	2
Manipur	2
Meghalaya	2
Tripura	2
Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Daman and Diu (UT)	2
Mizoram	1
Nagaland	1
Puducherry (UT)	1
Sikkim	1
Andaman and Nicobar Islands (UT)	1
Chandigarh (UT)	1
Lakshadweep (UT)	1
Ladakh (UT)	1
A woman casting her vote in the 2019 elections
A woman casting her vote in the 2019 electionsSimple majority, or the first-past-the-post system, decides which candidate will win a seat in a constituency.
The first-past-the-post (FPTP) system, or simple majority, is used to decide which candidate will win a seat from each constituency. Voters each cast one vote to choose a candidate from their constituency. Of all the candidates contesting from a constituency, the one securing the highest number of votes wins.

To be eligible to vote, a person must be an Indian citizen at least 18 years of age. Voters must be “ordinarily resident” of the polling area of the constituency where they would like to be enrolled, and they must be registered to vote: they must have a valid voter ID card. Voters go to a polling booth within their constituency to cast their vote, which is recorded using electronic voting machines. According to the ECI, non-resident Indians (NRIs)—or Indian citizens who live outside India, have not gained the citizenship of any other country, and are “otherwise eligible to be registered as a voter in the address mentioned in [their] passport”—can register to vote by submitting the required documents. Once the verification process has been completed, NRIs can vote in person at a polling station in the constituency where they are registered. There is currently no provision for NRIs to vote remotely.


Get Unlimited Access
Try Britannica Premium for free and discover more.
How is the prime minister appointed?
Article 75 of the constitution of India does not lay down a specific procedure for appointing a prime minister; it states that the prime minister will be appointed by the president of India and that a minister, if not a member of parliament for any consecutive six months, will cease to be a minister after that period.

Did you know?
When H.D. Deve Gowda became the prime minister of India in June 1996, the appointment was alleged to be unconstitutional because he was not a member of either house of parliament when he took office. However, the Indian Supreme Court ruled that the Indian constitution allows a person to serve as prime minister (or chief minister of a state) for a period of six months regardless of membership in the parliament.

The party or coalition winning majority support in the Lok Sabha elections is asked by the president of India to form the government. The majority party or coalition nominates a leader, and the president of India appoints the leader as the prime minister. If no party or coalition wins an absolute majority, the president appoints a person who is most likely to be able to secure majority support in the Lok Sabha. The prime minister heads the Council of Ministers, which is appointed by the president with the advice of the prime minister. The Council of Ministers advises the president and is collectively responsible to the Lok Sabha.

The prime minister does not necessarily need to be a member of the Lok Sabha. The person may be a member of the Rajya Sabha. In fact, a candidate who is not a member of either house of the parliament may be invited by the president to be the prime minister, provided that the individual becomes a member of parliament within six months, in keeping with Article 75.

2024 Lok Sabha election schedule
The Lok Sabha is dissolved every five years, unless the term is extended during an emergency. The last Lok Sabha elections were held in 2019, and the term of the house ends on June 16, 2024.

A counting center in New Delhi, May 23, 2019
A counting center in New Delhi, May 23, 2019In the 2024 general election, votes will be counted on June 4.
On March 16 the ECI declared the dates for the 2024 elections, after it completed checking the election readiness of India’s states and union territories. The ECI declared that polling will be held across the country, in seven phases, between April 19 and June 1, and votes will be tabulated across counting centers on June 4.

Poll dates and phases
phase	date	constituencies
Source: Election Commission of India.
1	April 19, 2024	102 constituencies in 21 states
2	April 26, 2024	89 constituencies, 13 states
3	May 7, 2024	94 constituencies, 12 states
4	May 13, 2024	96 constituencies, 10 states
5	May 20, 2024	49 constituencies, 8 states
6	May 25, 2024	57 constituencies, 7 states
7	June 1, 2024	57 constituencies, 8 states
Tabulation and results	June 4, 2024	
Key political parties and alliances
(from left) Narendra Modi and Rahul Gandhi
(from left) Narendra Modi and Rahul Gandhi(From left) BJP leader and Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi arrives for the Parivartan Sankalp Mahasabha, a state assembly election rally, in Jaipur, Rajasthan, September 25, 2023; Congress leader Rahul Gandhi in Varanasi as a part of his Bharat Jodo Nyay Yatra, February 17, 2024.
The ECI recognizes 58 state political parties and six national parties—the Aam Aadmi Party (AAP); the Bahujan Samaj Party (BSP); the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP); the Communist Party of India (Marxist), or CPI (M); the Indian National Congress; and the National People’s Party. Other than the BSP, all the national parties are part of one of the following major alliances:

National Democratic Alliance (NDA)
The BJP-led NDA brings together almost 40 right-leaning political parties across the country, including the National People’s Party and state parties such as the faction of Shiv Sena led by chief minister of Maharashtra Eknath Shinde, the Janata Dal (United), the Janata Dal (Secular), the Rashtriya Lok Janata Dal, the Asom Gana Parishad, the Nationalist Democratic Progressive Party, and the Mizo National Front.

BJP’s candidate list and manifesto
On March 2, 2024, the BJP announced its first list of 195 candidates. It announced that Prime Minister Narendra Modi would contest from Varanasi, a constituency he won in the past two Lok Sabha elections. Union Home Minister Amit Shah would contest from Gandhinagar, defense minister Rajnath Singh would contest from Lucknow, and Smriti Irani would contest from Amethi, Uttar Pradesh state, where she won against Indian National Congress leader Rahul Gandhi in 2019. Many more candidate lists were released later, and there was some dissent among members of parliament who had been dropped.

The BJP’s poll manifesto, titled “Modi ki Guarantee” (Modi’s Guarantee), highlighted measures that had already been implemented by the ruling BJP in its two last terms, including the free food-grain scheme implemented in 2020, the Ayushman Bharat national health protection scheme, vaccination drives for children, loans launched in 2015 for non-farm small and micro enterprises, and an increased agricultural budget over the years. The manifesto also listed the construction of the Ram Mandir and the hosting of the G20 Summit as achievements. It promised continued provision of free grains, free health treatment (with a cap), and free LPG connections to lower economic groups, among other benefits. The BJP’s promises to middle-class voters included job creation, more top-quality educational institutes, and development of sustainable cities. The manifesto also sought to attract women and young voters by listing women’s empowerment measures and ways to create high-quality educational institutes, entrepreneurial opportunities, and world-class sports facilities. Free healthcare for senior citizens was an important promise in the 2024 manifesto. Many measures were listed for farmers, fishing communities, daily wage earners, small traders, and tribal communities. Strengthening the position of India globally, its economy, manufacturing facilities, and infrastructure facilities were some other highlights of the manifesto, as were fighting terrorism and border protection. Cultural development and preservation, good governance, technological innovations, and sustainability were some of the other key themes. According to news reports, the BJP aimed to surpass the 303 seats it won in 2019. The party set a target of winning 370 seats in the upcoming Lok Sabha elections, taking the target up to 400 when considering seats it aimed to win with other NDA allies.

Leadership
India Today’s Mood of the Nation survey, released in early February 2024, predicted that the BJP-led NDA, with Narendra Modi at the helm, is likely to win the Lok Sabha elections for a third time with a clear majority, even though it may fall short of its target of 400 seats. The survey of more than 35,000 people in all the Lok Sabha constituencies revealed that the rise of India’s global stature, the Ram Temple construction in Ayodhya; the Modi government’s management of the COVID-19 pandemic, the revocation of Article 370 from Jammu and Kashmir (the act gave Jammu and Kashmir a special status and a certain amount of autonomy), and a corruption-free image are perceived to be some defining aspects of Prime Minister Modi’s leadership. The survey also highlighted concerns over unemployment and rising prices during Modi’s tenure. Political strategist Prashant Kishor, who helped the Narendra Modi-led BJP win a majority in the 2014 Lok Sabha elections, predicted in an interview with India Today’s Rajdeep Sardesai that events like the Ram Temple consecration will likely help consolidate votes rather than gain new ones.

Indian National Developmental Inclusive Alliance (INDIA)
The Indian National Developmental Inclusive Alliance (INDIA) formed in 2023 as an alliance of the Indian National Congress, the AAP, the CPI (M), and state parties such as Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam (DMK), Jharkhand Mukti Morcha, the faction of Shiv Sena led by Uddhav Thackeray, former Maharashtra chief minister and son of Shiv Sena founder Bal Thackeray, the Samajwadi Party, and the Indian Union Muslim League. It is an opposition front set up to contest the 2024 general election and prevent the BJP from coming to power for a third consecutive term. INDIA formed after the United Progressive Alliance (UPA), the former Congress-led alliance, dissolved.

Congress’s seat-sharing agreements and manifesto
The Congress released its first list of candidates about a month later than the BJP; and it included Rahul Gandhi for Wayanad constituency and Shashi Tharoor, a current member of parliament, for Thiruvananthapuram (both in Kerala state). The Congress selected former student leader Kanhaiya Kumar to contest from North East Delhi, and former Punjab chief minister Charanjit Singh Channi to contest from Jalandhar. The Congress also managed to make some breakthroughs in seat-sharing agreements with crucial allies, including the Samajwadi Party in Uttar Pradesh state and the AAP in Delhi. Of the 80 Lok Sabha seats in Uttar Pradesh, the Congress contested 17, while the Samajwadi Party contested 63. For the seven Lok Sabha seats in Delhi, the AAP contested four seats, and the Congress contested three. The AAP and Congress also announced seat-sharing deals for Haryana, Gujarat, Goa, Chandigarh, and Gujarat. The two parties, however, did not make any seat-sharing announcements for Punjab, where the ruling AAP was expected to contest all 13 Lok Sabha seats. With some of AAP’s senior leaders, including Delhi chief minister Arvind Kejriwal, mostly in judicial custody during the campaigning period over allegations of money laundering in a now-scrapped excise policy, Arvind Kejriwal’s wife Sunita Kejriwal was expected to be one of AAP’s star campaigners, especially in Gujarat, Prime Minister Modi’s home state.

The Congress’s election manifesto, titled “Nyay Patra” (Justice Letter), focused on social justice and equity; youth justice; women’s empowerment; and justice for farmers, fishing communities, and workers. Two of its key sections, titled “defending the constitution” and “federalism,” promised to build trust in democratic institutions and to promote a healthy relationship between the union and the states. Protecting India’s art, culture, and heritage; strengthening its economy; job creation; tax reforms; development of industry and infrastructure; rural and urban development; national and internal security; foreign policy; and environment were some of its other focus areas. Interestingly, a small section titled “north eastern states” tried to address some of the issues that have traditionally been a concern in the region, largely due to its remoteness.

Leadership
It is an expected part of Indian elections for the prime ministerial candidate to be proposed by a party after it has won the elections. However, after West Bengal chief minister Mamata Banerjee proposed Congress president Mallikarjun Kharge as INDIA’s prime ministerial candidate in December 2023, it was unclear whether Kharge, Rahul Gandhi, or someone else would be INDIA’s leader of choice. The alliance did not make any announcements, and Kharge himself brushed off the idea, saying that winning a majority is the first priority.

Gandhi launched two road trips to reach out to India’s voters. The first, Bharat Jodo Yatra (“Unite India Tour”), started from Kanyakumari at the southern tip of India in September 2022 and ended in Kashmir in India’s north in January 2023. Many celebrities, army veterans, and even opposition leaders joined Gandhi during the trip. The second, Bharat Jodo Nyay Yatra (nyay meaning “justice”), which launched in Manipur in northeastern India in January 2024 and was set to conclude in Mumbai in western India in March 2024, has been perceived to be much less effective than the first trip. According to the event’s website, the aim of the Bharat Jodo Nyay Yatra is to address injustices “faced by the poor, labourers, farmers, women, youth, backward classes, Dalits, [tribal communities], and minorities.” This second road trip was marred by several allies and senior leaders either parting ways with the Congress or refusing to join the yatra (“tour”). Akhilesh Yadav, a key ally in the Samajwadi Party, refused to join Gandhi’s yatra until a seat-sharing agreement was reached for the 2024 elections. (Following this, the Congress arrived at a seat-sharing agreement with the party in late February 2024.) The Congress also lost a key ally in Bihar when Nitish Kumar, Bihar’s chief minister and leader of the Janata Dal (United), decided to join hands with the BJP in the midst of this yatra, in late January.

Past Lok Sabha election results
In the 2019 Lok Sabha elections, the BJP secured a landslide win with 303 seats, surpassing the 282 seats it won in 2014. The combined seats won by the BJP-led NDA was 353 in 2019. In contrast, the Congress won just 52 seats in the 2019 election, and the number went up to 90 combined seats for the Congress-led UPA. Mahagathbandhan—an alliance between the Samajwadi Party (SP), Bahujan Samaj Party (BSP), and Rashtriya Lok Dal (RLD)—and other alliances together won 99 seats in 2019. Although the UPA’s 2019 performance was better than its performance in the 2014 Lok Sabha elections, when it won just 60 seats, the improvement was not significant, and the BJP retained power during its second consecutive term in 2019.


2024 election results
To win a majority and form the government at the center, a party or alliance needs to win 272 seats out of the 543 seats in the Lok Sabha. In a surprising turn of events, the ruling BJP won just 240 seats and failed to secure a majority on its own in the 2024 elections, contrary to what BJP leaders and recent exit polls had predicted. However, the BJP-led NDA secured 293 seats, setting it on the path to form the federal government and to secure a third consecutive term as prime minister for Narendra Modi. The BJP will depend heavily on its allies in this third term.

The 240 seats won by the BJP show a sharp decline compared with the 303 seats it won in 2019 and the 282 seats it secured in 2014. Similarly, the BJP-led NDA’s win of 293 seats in 2024 is much lower than the 353 seats it won in 2019 and the 336 seats it secured in 2014. The Congress Party, on the other hand, gained 47 seats compared with its tally in the 2019 elections. INDIA was able to form a strong opposition to the NDA, winning an unexpected 234 seats.

Uttar Pradesh showed surprising results in the 2024 elections as the BJP suffered unexpected setbacks. Narendra Modi won the Varanasi seat against Ajay Rai, the Congress Party candidate, and BJP’s Rajnath Singh won from Lucknow. BJP’s Smriti Irani, however, lost the Amethi seat to Kishori Lal Sharma from the Congress. Congress leader Rahul Gandhi won the Rae Bareli seat by more than 300,000 votes. BJP’s Lallu Singh lost the Faizabad seat, which includes Ayodhya, where many thought the BJP will secure a definite victory after Prime Minister Modi inaugurated the long-promised Ram Mandir. Some exit polls predicted a big win for the BJP in Uttar Pradesh as it was a BJP stronghold in the past two elections, but the BJP managed to win just 33 of the 80 seats while the Akhilesh Yadav-led Samajwadi Party won a surprising 37 seats and the Congress won 6 seats.

The BJP had struggled to win seats in the state of Kerala in the past but its candidate Suresh Gopi, in a first, won the Thrissur seat by over 74,000 votes. In Maharashtra, however, the BJP and its alliance suffered a setback as the Congress and its alliance secured gains in the 2024 elections.

On the evening of June 4 Prime Minister Modi declared that the NDA is going to form the government for the third consecutive term and thanked the people of the country for their faith in the BJP and the NDA. In the Congress’s headquarters people celebrated the gains it made in the 2024 elections.

Shabnam Dohutia
Indian National Congress
Table of Contents
Introduction & Top Questions
History
Policy and structure
References & Edit History
Quick Facts & Related Topics
Images
Mahatma Gandhi and Sarojini Naidu on the Salt MarchJawaharlal Nehru, Indira Gandhi, and Harry S. TrumanRajiv GandhiGandhi, Sonia; Clinton, Hillary Rodham; Singh, Karan; Gandhi, Rahul2014 and 2019 Lok Sabha election results
For Students

Indian National Congress summary
Related Questions
What role did the Indian National Congress play in the Indian independence movement?
What policies have historically been supported by the Indian National Congress?
Is the Indian National Congress’s Gandhi family related to Mahatma Gandhi?
What did Mohammed Ali Jinnah study?
What is Jawaharlal Nehru known for?
Read Next
Fresh vegetables, carrots, cabbage, broccoli, peppers, tomato, squash
8 of History’s Most Famous Vegetarians
The assassination of President Abraham Lincoln at Ford's Theatre, Washington, D.C., April 14th, 1865; from a lithograph by Currier and Ives.
9 Infamous Assassins and the World Leaders They Dispatched
The Elephant symbol of the Republican Party and the Donkey symbol of the Democratic Party, with the American flag behind
Why Are Two Political Parties Dominant in the U.S.?
Libertarian presidential candidate Gary Johnson speaks in Concord, New Hampshire, on August 25, 2016.
Libertarianism
Discover
Black widow spider
9 of the World’s Deadliest Spiders
Ruminant. Deer. Red deer. Cervus elaphus. Buck. Stag. Antlers.
9 of the World’s Deadliest Mammals
Cheetah (Acinonyx jubatus) standing on rock, side view, Masai Mara National Reserve, Kenya
The Fastest Animals on Earth
American bison (Bison bison) also known as buffalo or plains buffalo on the prairie, western U.S.
What’s the Difference Between Bison and Buffalo?
Ice Sledge Hockey, Hockey Canada Cup, USA (left) vs Canada,  2009. UBC Thunderbird Arena, Vancouver, BC, competition site for Olympic ice hockey and Paralympic ice sledge hockey. Vancouver 2010 Olympic and Paralympic Winter Games, Vancouver Olympics
10 Best Hockey Players of All Time
Female meadow adder snake (Vipera ursinii) Also called meadow viper or Ursini's viper. Reptile venomous poisonous tongue
What’s the Difference Between Venomous and Poisonous?
autumn, fall, pumpkins, cornucopia, gords, thanksgiving, leaf
Thanksgiving Day in the United States
Politics, Law & Government
Politics & Political Systems
Mahatma Gandhi and Sarojini Naidu on the Salt March
Mahatma Gandhi and Sarojini Naidu on the Salt March Mahatma Gandhi and Sarojini Naidu on the Salt March in western India, March 1930.
Indian National Congress
political party, India
Also known as: All-India Congress Party, Congress (I) Party, Congress Party, Indian National Congress-Indira
Written and fact-checked by 
Last Updated: Nov 23, 2024 • Article History
Quick Facts
Byname: Congress Party
Date: 1885 - present
Areas Of Involvement: national liberation movement
Related People: Mahatma Gandhi Jawaharlal Nehru Mohammed Ali Jinnah Priyanka Gandhi Vadra Indira Gandhi
Top Questions
What is the Indian National Congress?
When was the Indian National Congress founded?
What role did the Indian National Congress play in the Indian independence movement?
News • Adani fraud allegations rock Indian Parliament as opposition demands probe into billionaire's firms • Nov. 28, 2024, 2:39 AM ET (AP) 
Indian National Congress, broadly based political party of India. Formed in 1885, the Indian National Congress dominated the Indian movement for independence from Great Britain. It subsequently formed most of India’s governments from the time of independence and often had a strong presence in many state governments. Since 2014 it has been out of power at the central government level.

(Read Indira Gandhi’s 1975 Britannica essay on global underprivilege.)

History
The pre-independence period
The Indian National Congress first convened in December 1885, though the idea of an Indian nationalist movement opposed to British rule dated from the 1850s. During its first several decades, the Congress Party passed fairly moderate reform resolutions, though many within the organization were becoming radicalized by the increased poverty that accompanied British imperialism. In the early 20th century, elements within the party began to endorse a policy of swadeshi (“of our own country”), which called on Indians to boycott of imported British goods and promoted Indian-made goods. By 1917 the group’s “extremist” Home Rule wing, which was formed by Bal Gangadhar Tilak and Annie Besant the previous year, had begun to exert significant influence by appealing to India’s diverse social classes.

In the 1920s and ’30s the Congress Party, led by Mohandas (Mahatma) Gandhi, began advocating nonviolent noncooperation. The new change in tactics was precipitated by the protest over the perceived feebleness of the constitutional reforms enacted in early 1919 (Rowlatt Acts) and Britain’s manner of carrying them out, as well as by the widespread outrage among Indians in response to the massacre of civilians in Amritsar (Punjab) that April. Many of the acts of civil disobedience that followed were implemented through the All India Congress Committee, formed in 1929, which advocated avoiding taxes as a protest against British rule. Notable in that regard was the Salt March in 1930 led by Gandhi. Another wing of the Congress Party, which believed in working within the existing system, contested general elections in 1923 and 1937 as the Swaraj (Home Rule) Party, with particular success in the latter year, winning 7 out of 11 provinces.

When World War II began in 1939, Britain made India a belligerent without consulting Indian elected councils. That action angered Indian officials and prompted the Congress Party to declare that India would not support the war effort until it had been granted complete independence. In 1942 the organization sponsored mass civil disobedience, called the Quit India Movement, to support the demand that the British leave India. British authorities responded by imprisoning the entire Congress Party leadership, including Gandhi, and many remained in jail until 1945. After the war the British government of Clement Attlee passed an independence bill in July 1947, and independence was achieved the following month. In January 1950 India’s constitution as an independent state took effect.

Postindependence dominance of the Nehru clan
Jawaharlal Nehru, Indira Gandhi, and Harry S. Truman
Jawaharlal Nehru, Indira Gandhi, and Harry S. TrumanThe first Indian prime minister, Jawaharlal Nehru (second from right), being greeted by U.S. Pres. Harry S. Truman at the start of Nehru's visit to the United States in October 1949. Nehru's daughter, Indira Gandhi, who later served as prime minister, is on the right.
From 1951 until his death in 1964, Jawaharlal Nehru dominated the Congress Party, which won overwhelming victories in the elections of 1951–52, 1957, and 1962. The party united in 1964 to elect Lal Bahadur Shastri and in 1966 Indira Gandhi (Nehru’s daughter) to the posts of party leader and thus prime minister. In 1967, however, Indira Gandhi faced open revolt within the party, and in 1969 she was expelled from the party by a group called the “Syndicate.” Nevertheless, her New Congress Party scored a landslide victory in the 1971 elections, and for a period it was unclear which party was the true rightful heir of the Indian National Congress label.

Rajiv Gandhi
Rajiv GandhiRajiv Gandhi, 1985.
In the mid-1970s the New Congress Party’s popular support began to fracture. From 1975 Gandhi’s government grew increasingly more authoritarian, and unrest among the opposition grew. In the parliamentary elections held in March 1977, the opposition Janata (People’s) Party scored a landslide victory over the Congress Party, winning 295 seats in the Lok Sabha (the lower chamber of India’s parliament) against 153 for the Congress; Gandhi herself lost to her Janata opponent. On January 2, 1978, she and her followers seceded and formed a new opposition party, popularly called Congress (I)—the “I” signifying Indira. Over the next year, her new party attracted enough members of the legislature to become the official opposition, and in 1981 the national election commission declared it the “real” Indian National Congress. In 1996 the “I” designation was dropped. In November 1979 Gandhi regained a parliamentary seat, and the following year she was again elected prime minister. In 1982 her son Rajiv Gandhi became nominal head of the party, and, upon her assassination in October 1984, he became prime minister. In December he led the Congress Party to an overwhelming victory in which it secured 401 seats in the legislature.


Get Unlimited Access
Try Britannica Premium for free and discover more.
Although the Congress Party remained the largest party in parliament in 1989, Rajiv Gandhi was unseated as prime minister by a coalition of opposition parties. While campaigning to regain power in May 1991, he was assassinated by a suicide bomber associated with the Tamil Tigers, a separatist group in Sri Lanka. He was succeeded as party leader by P.V. Narasimha Rao, who was elected prime minister in June 1991.

The party since 1991
In contrast to the party’s historical socialist policies, Rao embraced economic liberalization. By 1996 the party’s image was suffering from various reports of corruption, and in elections that year the Congress Party was reduced to 140 seats, its lowest number in the Lok Sabha to that point, becoming parliament’s second largest party. Rao subsequently resigned as prime minister and, in September, as party president. He was succeeded as president by Sitaram Kesri, the party’s first non-Brahman leader.

The United Front (UF) government—a coalition of 13 parties—came to power in 1996 as a minority government with the support of the Congress Party. However, as the largest single party in opposition in parliament after the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP; Indian People’s Party), the Congress Party was vital in both making and defeating the UF. In November 1997 the Congress Party withdrew its support from the UF, prompting elections in February 1998. To boost its popularity among the masses and improve the party’s performance in the forthcoming elections, the Congress Party leaders urged Sonia Gandhi—the Italian-born widow of Rajiv Gandhi—to assume the leadership of the party. She had previously declined overtures to play an active role in party affairs, but at that time she agreed to campaign. Although a BJP-led coalition government came to power, the Congress Party and its partners were able to deny the BJP an absolute majority in the Lok Sabha. The party’s better-than-expected performance in the national elections was attributed by many observers to Sonia Gandhi’s charisma and vigorous campaigning. After the 1998 elections, Kesri resigned as party president, and Sonia Gandhi assumed the leadership of the party.

Gandhi, Sonia; Clinton, Hillary Rodham; Singh, Karan; Gandhi, Rahul
Gandhi, Sonia; Clinton, Hillary Rodham; Singh, Karan; Gandhi, RahulSonia Gandhi (second from left) in New Delhi, with (from left to right) Hillary Rodham Clinton, Karan Singh, and Rahul Gandhi, 2009.
National parliamentary elections were again held in 1999, when one of the BJP’s major allies, the All India Dravidian Progressive Federation (All India Anna Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam; AIADMK) party, withdrew its support. Despite aggressive campaigning by its leaders, the Congress Party suffered a worse electoral performance than it had in 1996 and 1998, winning only 114 seats. Nevertheless, in the 2004 national elections the party scored a surprising victory and returned to power. Gandhi, however, declined an invitation to become prime minister and instead supported Manmohan Singh, a former finance minister, who in May 2004 became the country’s first Sikh prime minister. The party again surprised pundits in the 2009 parliamentary elections by increasing its number of seats in the Lok Sabha from 153 to 206, its best showing since 1991.

By the 2014 Lok Sabha polling, however, the party had lost much of its popular support, mainly because of several years of poor economic conditions in the country and growing discontent over a series of corruption scandals involving government officials. The party touted its record at passing legislation aimed at improving the lot of those living in poverty and rural areas, and it fielded Sonia’s son, Rahul Gandhi, to be its candidate for prime minister. However, the BJP and its leading candidate, Narendra Modi, successfully won over the electorate. The results of the elections, announced in mid-May, were an overwhelming electoral victory for the BJP while the Congress Party suffered a stunning loss, securing only 44 seats in the chamber (in 2015 the party won a by-election in Madhya Pradesh, increasing its seat total to 45). It was the party’s worst-ever performance in a national election. One consequence of its poor performance was that it was not able to assume the position of the official opposition party, since it failed to garner the minimum 55 seats (10 percent of the chamber’s total) required for that role. Singh left office on May 26, the day Modi was sworn in as prime minister.

Sonia Gandhi stepped down from leadership in late 2017, and her son Rahul became president of the Congress Party. He faced a number of criticisms, including that he, as the fourth generation of the Nehru-Gandhi dynasty, was elitist and lackluster. Within his party he was criticized for his outward display of devotion to Shiva, interpreted as an attempt to tap into the BJP’s appeal to Hindu populism. Some observers, however, believed that Gandhi’s display of Hindu devotion and his efforts to unite rival factions within the party helped the Congress Party outperform the BJP in the 2018 state elections held in the Hindu strongholds of Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan, and Chhattisgarh.

Still, the Congress Party performed only marginally better in the 2019 elections for the Lok Sabha than it did in 2014, prompting Rahul Gandhi to step down. Sonia Gandhi was selected to lead the party until a successor could be found, and in 2022 she was succeeded by Mallikarjun Kharge.

The Congress and its allies improved their performance in the 2024 general election to the Lok Sabha, winning 234 seats out 543 and reducing the BJP to 240 seats, below the target of 272. The Congress’s individual contribution to the alliance’s total was 99 seats out of 234. The BJP formed the government with the help of its allies.

State politics
The Congress Party’s presence at the state level has closely mirrored its performance at the national level. It dominated nearly all state governments in the early years after independence and later began alternating power with other national parties (e.g., the BJP) or with local parties (e.g., the Telugu Desam Party in Andhra Pradesh). By the early 21st century, however, Congress’s influence in state politics had declined to the point where it controlled only a minority of state governments. The party has tended to do better in the northeastern and northern states and poorly in most of the southern states.

Policy and structure
The Congress Party is a hierarchically structured party. Delegates from state and district parties attend an annual national conference, which elects a president and the All India Congress Committee. However, the 20-member Congress Working Committee, the majority of whose members are appointed by the party president (handpicked by the prime minister when the party is in power), wields enormous influence. The party is also organized into various committees and sections (e.g., youth and women’s groups), and it publishes a daily newspaper, the National Herald. Mirroring the party’s declining fortunes, the party’s membership dropped from nearly 40 million in the mid-1990s to under 20 million at the beginning of the 21st century.

The party has traditionally supported socialist economic policies within the framework of a mixed economy. In the 1990s, however, it endorsed market reforms, including privatization and the deregulation of the economy. It also has supported secular policies that encourage equal rights for all citizens, including those in lower castes. Throughout much of the Cold War period, the Congress Party championed a foreign policy of nonalignment, which called for India to form ties with both the West and communist countries but to avoid formal alliances with either. Nonetheless, American support for Pakistan led the party to endorse a friendship treaty with the Soviet Union in 1971.

The Editors of Encyclopaedia Britannica
This article was most recently revised and updated by Gitanjali Roy.